README.md, before:

# HPC Portal

A web portal providing a simple interface to run packaged applications via a HPC
batch system. The portal is designed primarily for beginner or occasional users
of HPC facilities. Integration with data repositories supports publication of
data compatible with FAIR principles.

## Feature Overview

* Users create jobs by selecting from configured lists of job resources and
  software packages:

  ![A form for the initial step in job creation](docs/images/resources.png)

* Based on the selected software the user then uploads relevant files to
  complete the job submission process, e.g.:

  ![A form for file upload step in job creation](docs/images/job_files.png)

* Job outputs can be reviewed via a simple directory view or the Open OnDemand
  Files app.
* Information about software, resources and submission time along with an
  optional description are recorded for all jobs. Jobs can be filtered based on
  searchers against this data.
* Jobs are organised into collections called projects.
* User's can link the portal with supported data repositories to allow one-click
  publication of job outputs. The DOI for any publications are available within
  the portal. Publications may include rich metadata based on the software used.

## Technical Overview

The portal has been developed as a Passenger App within the [Open OnDemand][]
(OOD) framework. This approach allows the portal to be very simple but also
portable across a wide range of HPC infrastructure. OOD provides a consistent
programmatic interface for interacting with a number of popular HPC resource
managers. It also supports a wide range of authentication mechanisms. All portal
processes and jobs are run using the correct UID for each user.

[Open Ondemand]: https://openondemand.org/

The portal is written in Python (>=3.7) using [Django][]. Front-end web content
is almost exclusively HTML with very minimal use of JavaScript. Interaction with
the OOD libraries is provided via simple Ruby shims called as a sub-process.

[Django]: https://www.djangoproject.com/

Integrations with data repositories are supported via a plugin mechanism. This
allows integrations with institution-specific repositories to be developed and
deployed easily. Authentication using OAuth2 only is supported however the
provided data models may also be suitable for use with other mechanisms.

The portal is primarily configured via a yaml file and is extremely
flexible. Use of a templating approach means there are no restrictions on the
types of computing resources or software that can be made available. It is
possible for users to add their own configuration within relevant parts of the
template. This can be useful for e.g. providing accounting information.

## Setup Instructions

### Requirements

* A server with an Open OnDemand installation with the required cluster
  configuration completed. The filesystem where job outputs will be saved must
  be mounted and accessible to processes with expected user UIDs. The built-in
  Files app of Open OnDemand must be enabled.
* An installation of Python >= 3.7.

### Test Deployment

It's best to first deploy a version of the portal within the OOD development
sandbox to allow testing and refinement of the configuration. If you're not
familiar with this process its strongly recommended that you follow the
[tutorial][] provided by the OOD documentation first.

[tutorial]: https://osc.github.io/ood-documentation/latest/app-development/tutorials-passenger-apps.html

When you're ready [clone and setup][] the portal app. Some additional
configuration is required before the app will run:

[clone and setup]: https://osc.github.io/ood-documentation/latest/app-development/tutorials-passenger-apps/ps-to-quota.html#clone-and-setup

1. Create a Python (>=3.7) virtual environment containing the dependencies for
   the portal e.g.:

   ```
   python -mvenv /var/portal_venv/
   /var/portal_venv/bin/pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

1. Edit `/etc/ood/config/nginx_stage.yml` and add the below entry (or
   equivalent) to the `pun_custom_env` item:

   ```
   PORTAL_VENV: '/var/portal_venv/bin/python'
   ```

1. If the portal source code is not on a filesystem from which jobs can be
   submitted then in the root directory create a `.env` file containing
   something like:

   ```
   JOBS_DIR=${HOME}/portal_jobs_dev
   ```

   Jobs will be stored and submitted from the specified location. You can skip
   this step in which case job files will be stored in `portal_jobs` in the same
   directory as the portal source code.
1. Django's usual method for serving static files during development doesn't
   work within OOD so run the below command to have Apache serve them instead:

   ```
   /var/portal_venv/bin/python manage.py collectstatic
   ```

1. Create a minimal configuration file by taking a copy of
   `docs/example_config.yaml`. A value for the `cluster` key must be added in
   order for it to be viable. This should be the name of the cluster that the
   portal will use for job submission as configured for OOD (i.e. the file
   prefix for the cluster configuration file in `/etc/ood/config/clusters.d`).

Using this setup you should now be able to launch the portal via the development
sandbox interface. It won't be possible to run any jobs however using such a
minimal configuration. See below for details on creating a full configuration.

## Configuration

Before creating a production deployment a full configuration file must be
developed. This configuration will depend on details of your cluster so only
generic guidance is provided here. The HPC Portal is very flexible and you have
a lot of choice in how jobs will behave when run. An [example configuration][] as
used in production by Imperial College London is available for reference.

Reference documentation for the configuration file can be found below however
we'll start with a short overview. The HPC Portal generates submission scripts
for jobs via a simple template system. The primary template is provided by the
`script_template` key in the config file. Different resource and software
configurations provide lines to be inserted into the template.

Software configurations can run arbitrarily complex workflows. As a simple
example, the Imperial College [example configuration][] for Gaussian does the
following:

* Adds appropriate directives to the Gaussian input file based on job resources
* If an optional formatted checkpoint file is provided runs `unfchk` and adds
  the `OldChk` directive to the Gaussian input file
* Runs `formchk` after the job is complete.

[example configuration]: https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/hpc_portal_config

### Configuration File Reference

All keys are required unless stated otherwise. Validation of config files is
provided by the [marshmallow][] library when the HPC Portal loads. This should
give easy to understand errors in the case of problems in the config file. You
can also use the script `config_validation.py` to check your config.

[marshmallow]: https://marshmallow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/

#### `cluster`

The name of the cluster that the portal will use for job submission as
configured for OOD (i.e. the file prefix for the cluster configuration file in
`/etc/ood/config/clusters.d`).

#### `custom_config_line_regex`

A regular expression used to validate custom configuration snippets provided by
users. Typically this will be used to limit lines to valid directives for your
scheduler, e.g. in the case of PBS this would be something like:

```
"^#PBS .*"
```

To provide no validation use `.*`.

#### `enabled_repositories`

May be empty or a list of strings indicating data repositories to which users
may publish data. To be enabled a data repository must be registered via the
repository plugin system. See the section on [Data
Repositories](#data-repositories) for details. Strings in this list should
correspond to the label attribute of the registered class. Plugins for the
following repositories are included with the Portal:

* Zenodo (label - 'zenodo')

Once enabled it should be possible for users to link to a repository via the
Profile page. Please note that there may be extra setup steps for each
repository (see below section of Data Repositories).

#### `resources`

A list of dictionaries specifying the available resource choices for running
jobs. Each list entry corresponds to an item in the dropdown box for resources
when creating a new job. Each dictionary contains exactly 2 keys:

* `description` (string): A short human readable description of this resource
  selection. This is the text that will be displayed in the dropdown menu and
  which will be recorded when a job runs.
* `script_lines` (string): The lines that will be inserted into
  `script_template`. This should include the appropriate scheduler directives
  but it may also be useful to set environment variables that can be used in the
  template.

#### `script_template`

The main template used to generate a submission script for each job. Insertion
points are denoted by strings inside curly braces e.g. `{commands}`. The
template must meet the following criteria:

* It must set the job name by using the insertion point `{job_name}`
* Directly beneath any scheduler directives should be the line
  `{custom_config}{resources}`. Note that `{resources}` will be replaced with
  the specified scheduler directives when the template is compiled into a
  submission script.
* It should change the current working directory to the submission directory of
  the job. This should be easily referenced via the appropriate environment
  variable for your resource manager.
* When the job is running it should record the ongoing duration (in seconds) of
  the job to a file named `WALLTIME` in the job directory. The following idiom
  near the start can be included to achieve this:

  ```
  (while true; do echo $SECONDS > WALLTIME; sleep 5s; done) &
  ```

* Its final line must be `{commands}`. This is the point where the different
  script lines for each software will be added.

An example template for PBS that meets these criteria is provided below:

```
script_template: |
  #!/bin/bash
  #PBS -N {job_name}
  {custom_config}{resources}

  cd "$PBS_O_WORKDIR"

  (while true; do  echo $SECONDS > WALLTIME; sleep 5s; done) &

  {commands}
```

#### `software`

A list of dictionaries, each specifying a piece of software that can be run
using the Portal. Each list entry corresponds to an item in the dropdown box for
software when creating a new job. Each dictionary contains 4 keys:

* `commands` (string): The commands to be inserted into `script_template` that
  actually run the software. Insertion points may be provided for each of the
  keys in the dictionaries specify optional and required input files. These
  insertion points will be replaced with the name of the file as uploaded by the
  user. In the case of an optional file that was not uploaded an empty string is
  substituted. The below idiom can be used to determine if an optional file was
  provided, e.g. for the optional file `file1`:

  ```
  [[ "{file1}" != "" ]] && commands if file is present
  ```

  Two additional files must be created by the commands:
  * `FILES_TO_PUBLISH`: A tab-separated file containing information about which
    files to include in any publications made to a linked data repository. The
    file must contain two columns. The first line must provide the headers
    `name` and `description`. Each following entry should give the name of the
    file to be published and a short description in the appropriate column.
  * `METADATA`: A tab-separated file containing rich metadata to include in any
    publications. The file must contain two columns. The first line must provide
    the headers `name` and `value`. Each following entry should provide the name
    of an item metadata and its value.
* `input_files` (dictionary): The input files to be provided by the end user to
  run their calculation. This dictionary must contain 2 keys, `required` and
  `optional`. Each of these in turn may be either be empty or a dictionary
  containing insertion point tags (keys) and human-readable descriptions
  (values). This is most easily demonstrated with an example.

  ```
  input_files:
    required:
      file1: human readable description of file1
    optional:
      file2: human readable description of file1
  ```

  The above defines two input files, `file1` and `file2`, for a piece of
  software. Of these `file1` is required for a job to run whilst `file2` is
  optional. This is reflected in the form generated for users when submitting a
  job using this software. Both `file1` and `file2` are available as insertion
  points within the body of `commands`. The human readable description of each
  file will be used as the label for the form field during upload.
* `help_text` (string): The help text made available to the user when submitting
  a job with this software. It should provide sufficient detail to enable users
  to prepare the input files for their jobs. This text is rendered as part of a
  web page and may contain html tags.
* `name` (string): The human readable name of the software. This is the text
  that will be displayed in the dropdown menu and which will be recorded when a
  job runs.

#### `external_links` (optional)

A dictionary of links to external resources. These are added as items to the
banner menu at the top of the Portal web interface. The intended use is to add
links to resources (e.g. a service status page) that may be relevant for
individual deployments. Both keys and values of the dictionary should be
strings. Keys will be used as the text displayed in the banner menu whilst
values provide the associated link. For example:

```
external_links:
  "System Status": https://my.status.page
```

### Production Deployment

Once a suitable configuration has been developed and tested.

1. Clone a copy of the repository source code to a directory within
   `/var/www/ood/apps/sys`
1. Within the new clone, create a new file `settings/site.py`. This file will
   contain all of the Django settings required for a site specific
   deployment. Among it's imports it must have `from .production import *` to
   pick up the configuration from both `settings.py` and `production.py` in the
   same directory. See the Django documentation for full details of valid
   settings. At a minimum you will need to set values for `ALLOWED_HOSTS` and
   `ADMINS` as well as valid configuration of an SMTP server (including
   credentials if required). You can also use this file to overwrite any
   settings from `settings.py` and `production.py`. Settings for the Portal that
   you may wish to override:
  * `DATABASES["default"]["name"]` - due to OOD's use of dedicated per user
    servers to run apps each user has their own sqlite3 database. The value of
    this setting determines where the database is saved. The default location is
    the file `portal_db_DO_NOT_DELETE.sqlite3` in the users home directory.
  * `JOBS_DIR` - this is the location where the Portal will store data for jobs
    that it runs. Job submission is carried out from sub-directories. The
    default value is the directory `portal_jobs` in the user's home directory.
1. Create a `.env` file in the root directory of the portal source code
   containing:

   ```
   SECRET_KEY="A new randomly generated secret key"
   DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE="portal.settings.site"
   PORTAL_CONFIG_PATH="/path/to/your/portal_config.yaml"
   ```

The Portal should now be launchable for all users via the OOD Dashboard as "HPC
Portal" under the Jobs category. If you've enabled the Zenodo repository please
see the below section on completing the setup steps required for this.

### Data Repositories

The Portal supports publishing individual jobs to linked data repository
services. The DOI from the publication is recorded in the portal against the job
record. Where repositories support the full DataCite Subject schema publication
of rich metadata is also possible. The files and metadata uploaded for a record
are specified on a job-by-job basis from the contents of the `FILES_TO_PUBLISH`
and `METADATA` files in a job directory. It is expect that these files will be
created during a job according to the software being used. See the documentation
for the`software` key within the [Configuration File
Reference](#configuration-file-reference) section.

The portal ships with a Zenodo integration that can be enabled. See [Using the
Zenodo Integration](#using-the-zenodo-integration) below.

Data repository integrations are written as plugins. Any Python module placed in
`main/repositories/plugins/` will be imported. See [Developing a Repository
Plugin](#developing-a-repository-plugin) for details on writing a plugin.

#### Using the Zenodo Integration

Once enabled this integration requires the details of an developer (OAuth2)
application in order to function. This can be setup via the Zenodo website using
any valid user account but it's suggested to something institutional so that
everything looks official for end users. At time of writing an app can be
created via Settings->Applications->Developer Applications. The correct redirect
URI to use will depend on your deployment of the Portal but should be the URI of
the index page suffixed with `token/zenodo`. The client type should be private.

Once created you'll need the Client ID and Client Secret in order to
proceed. With these in hand add the following entries to the `.env` file in the
root of your portal:

```
ZENODO_CLIENT_ID="your client id"
ZENODO_CLIENT_SECRET="your client secret"
```

It should now be possible for users to link to the repository (authorize the
OAuth application) and publish jobs.

#### Developing a Repository Plugin

Repository integrations are provided by concrete sub-classes of the abstract
`RepositoryBase` defined in `main/repositories/base_repository.py`. The
sub-class must also be decorated by the `register` function defined in
`main/repositories/__init__.py`.

The `RepositoryBase` abstract class was designed with OAuth2 applications in
mind and only this method is officially supported. That said the class is
flexible enough that it can be (and has been) used with other schemes. The
included Zenodo integration is a good starting point for interacting with other
OAuth2 applications.

Commit message:

Add support for linking to configuration git repo

README.md, after:

# HPC Portal

A web portal providing a simple interface to run packaged applications via a HPC
batch system. The portal is designed primarily for beginner or occasional users
of HPC facilities. Integration with data repositories supports publication of
data compatible with FAIR principles.

## Feature Overview

* Users create jobs by selecting from configured lists of job resources and
  software packages:

  ![A form for the initial step in job creation](docs/images/resources.png)

* Based on the selected software the user then uploads relevant files to
  complete the job submission process, e.g.:

  ![A form for file upload step in job creation](docs/images/job_files.png)

* Job outputs can be reviewed via a simple directory view or the Open OnDemand
  Files app.
* Information about software, resources and submission time along with an
  optional description are recorded for all jobs. Jobs can be filtered based on
  searchers against this data.
* Jobs are organised into collections called projects.
* User's can link the portal with supported data repositories to allow one-click
  publication of job outputs. The DOI for any publications are available within
  the portal. Publications may include rich metadata based on the software used.

## Technical Overview

The portal has been developed as a Passenger App within the [Open OnDemand][]
(OOD) framework. This approach allows the portal to be very simple but also
portable across a wide range of HPC infrastructure. OOD provides a consistent
programmatic interface for interacting with a number of popular HPC resource
managers. It also supports a wide range of authentication mechanisms. All portal
processes and jobs are run using the correct UID for each user.

[Open Ondemand]: https://openondemand.org/

The portal is written in Python (>=3.7) using [Django][]. Front-end web content
is almost exclusively HTML with very minimal use of JavaScript. Interaction with
the OOD libraries is provided via simple Ruby shims called as a sub-process.

[Django]: https://www.djangoproject.com/

Integrations with data repositories are supported via a plugin mechanism. This
allows integrations with institution-specific repositories to be developed and
deployed easily. Authentication using OAuth2 only is supported however the
provided data models may also be suitable for use with other mechanisms.

The portal is primarily configured via a yaml file and is extremely
flexible. Use of a templating approach means there are no restrictions on the
types of computing resources or software that can be made available. It is
possible for users to add their own configuration within relevant parts of the
template. This can be useful for e.g. providing accounting information.

## Setup Instructions

### Requirements

* A server with an Open OnDemand installation with the required cluster
  configuration completed. The filesystem where job outputs will be saved must
  be mounted and accessible to processes with expected user UIDs. The built-in
  Files app of Open OnDemand must be enabled.
* An installation of Python >= 3.7.

### Test Deployment

It's best to first deploy a version of the portal within the OOD development
sandbox to allow testing and refinement of the configuration. If you're not
familiar with this process its strongly recommended that you follow the
[tutorial][] provided by the OOD documentation first.

[tutorial]: https://osc.github.io/ood-documentation/latest/app-development/tutorials-passenger-apps.html

When you're ready [clone and setup][] the portal app. Some additional
configuration is required before the app will run:

[clone and setup]: https://osc.github.io/ood-documentation/latest/app-development/tutorials-passenger-apps/ps-to-quota.html#clone-and-setup

1. Create a Python (>=3.7) virtual environment containing the dependencies for
   the portal e.g.:

   ```
   python -mvenv /var/portal_venv/
   /var/portal_venv/bin/pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

1. Edit `/etc/ood/config/nginx_stage.yml` and add the below entry (or
   equivalent) to the `pun_custom_env` item:

   ```
   PORTAL_VENV: '/var/portal_venv/bin/python'
   ```

1. If the portal source code is not on a filesystem from which jobs can be
   submitted then in the root directory create a `.env` file containing
   something like:

   ```
   JOBS_DIR=${HOME}/portal_jobs_dev
   ```

   Jobs will be stored and submitted from the specified location. You can skip
   this step in which case job files will be stored in `portal_jobs` in the same
   directory as the portal source code.
1. Django's usual method for serving static files during development doesn't
   work within OOD so run the below command to have Apache serve them instead:

   ```
   /var/portal_venv/bin/python manage.py collectstatic
   ```

1. Create a minimal configuration file by taking a copy of
   `docs/example_config.yaml`. A value for the `cluster` key must be added in
   order for it to be viable. This should be the name of the cluster that the
   portal will use for job submission as configured for OOD (i.e. the file
   prefix for the cluster configuration file in `/etc/ood/config/clusters.d`).

Using this setup you should now be able to launch the portal via the development
sandbox interface. It won't be possible to run any jobs however using such a
minimal configuration. See below for details on creating a full configuration.

## Configuration

Before creating a production deployment a full configuration file must be
developed. This configuration will depend on details of your cluster so only
generic guidance is provided here. The HPC Portal is very flexible and you have
a lot of choice in how jobs will behave when run. An [example configuration][] as
used in production by Imperial College London is available for reference.

Reference documentation for the configuration file can be found below however
we'll start with a short overview. The HPC Portal generates submission scripts
for jobs via a simple template system. The primary template is provided by the
`script_template` key in the config file. Different resource and software
configurations provide lines to be inserted into the template.

Software configurations can run arbitrarily complex workflows. As a simple
example, the Imperial College [example configuration][] for Gaussian does the
following:

* Adds appropriate directives to the Gaussian input file based on job resources
* If an optional formatted checkpoint file is provided runs `unfchk` and adds
  the `OldChk` directive to the Gaussian input file
* Runs `formchk` after the job is complete.



### Configuration File Reference

All keys are required unless stated otherwise. Validation of config files is
provided by the [marshmallow][] library when the HPC Portal loads. This should
give easy to understand errors in the case of problems in the config file. You
can also use the script `config_validation.py` to check your config.

[marshmallow]: https://marshmallow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/

#### `config_link` (optional)

A string providing a URL linking to the current portal configuration file. This
is primarily intended for use where the configuration is made public in a git
repository (e.g. the Imperial College [example configuration][]). This allows
users of the system to provide additional software configurations according to
their needs. When this key is provided the link is added to the "Create Job"
page of the Portal with the text "add a new software".

#### cluster

The name of the cluster that the portal will use for job submission as
configured for OOD (i.e. the file prefix for the cluster configuration file in
`/etc/ood/config/clusters.d`).

#### `custom_config_line_regex`

A regular expression used to validate custom configuration snippets provided by
users. Typically this will be used to limit lines to valid directives for your
scheduler, e.g. in the case of PBS this would be something like:

```
"^#PBS .*"
```

To provide no validation use `.*`.

#### `enabled_repositories`

May be empty or a list of strings indicating data repositories to which users
may publish data. To be enabled a data repository must be registered via the
repository plugin system. See the section on [Data
Repositories](#data-repositories) for details. Strings in this list should
correspond to the label attribute of the registered class. Plugins for the
following repositories are included with the Portal:

* Zenodo (label - 'zenodo')

Once enabled it should be possible for users to link to a repository via the
Profile page. Please note that there may be extra setup steps for each
repository (see below section of Data Repositories).

#### `resources`

A list of dictionaries specifying the available resource choices for running
jobs. Each list entry corresponds to an item in the dropdown box for resources
when creating a new job. Each dictionary contains exactly 2 keys:

* `description` (string): A short human readable description of this resource
  selection. This is the text that will be displayed in the dropdown menu and
  which will be recorded when a job runs.
* `script_lines` (string): The lines that will be inserted into
  `script_template`. This should include the appropriate scheduler directives
  but it may also be useful to set environment variables that can be used in the
  template.

#### `script_template`

The main template used to generate a submission script for each job. Insertion
points are denoted by strings inside curly braces e.g. `{commands}`. The
template must meet the following criteria:

* It must set the job name by using the insertion point `{job_name}`
* Directly beneath any scheduler directives should be the line
  `{custom_config}{resources}`. Note that `{resources}` will be replaced with
  the specified scheduler directives when the template is compiled into a
  submission script.
* It should change the current working directory to the submission directory of
  the job. This should be easily referenced via the appropriate environment
  variable for your resource manager.
* When the job is running it should record the ongoing duration (in seconds) of
  the job to a file named `WALLTIME` in the job directory. The following idiom
  near the start can be included to achieve this:

  ```
  (while true; do echo $SECONDS > WALLTIME; sleep 5s; done) &
  ```

* Its final line must be `{commands}`. This is the point where the different
  script lines for each software will be added.

An example template for PBS that meets these criteria is provided below:

```
script_template: |
  #!/bin/bash
  #PBS -N {job_name}
  {custom_config}{resources}

  cd "$PBS_O_WORKDIR"

  (while true; do  echo $SECONDS > WALLTIME; sleep 5s; done) &

  {commands}
```

#### `software`

A list of dictionaries, each specifying a piece of software that can be run
using the Portal. Each list entry corresponds to an item in the dropdown box for
software when creating a new job. Each dictionary contains 4 keys:

* `commands` (string): The commands to be inserted into `script_template` that
  actually run the software. Insertion points may be provided for each of the
  keys in the dictionaries specify optional and required input files. These
  insertion points will be replaced with the name of the file as uploaded by the
  user. In the case of an optional file that was not uploaded an empty string is
  substituted. The below idiom can be used to determine if an optional file was
  provided, e.g. for the optional file `file1`:

  ```
  [[ "{file1}" != "" ]] && commands if file is present
  ```

  Two additional files must be created by the commands:
  * `FILES_TO_PUBLISH`: A tab-separated file containing information about which
    files to include in any publications made to a linked data repository. The
    file must contain two columns. The first line must provide the headers
    `name` and `description`. Each following entry should give the name of the
    file to be published and a short description in the appropriate column.
  * `METADATA`: A tab-separated file containing rich metadata to include in any
    publications. The file must contain two columns. The first line must provide
    the headers `name` and `value`. Each following entry should provide the name
    of an item metadata and its value.
* `input_files` (dictionary): The input files to be provided by the end user to
  run their calculation. This dictionary must contain 2 keys, `required` and
  `optional`. Each of these in turn may be either be empty or a dictionary
  containing insertion point tags (keys) and human-readable descriptions
  (values). This is most easily demonstrated with an example.

  ```
  input_files:
    required:
      file1: human readable description of file1
    optional:
      file2: human readable description of file1
  ```

  The above defines two input files, `file1` and `file2`, for a piece of
  software. Of these `file1` is required for a job to run whilst `file2` is
  optional. This is reflected in the form generated for users when submitting a
  job using this software. Both `file1` and `file2` are available as insertion
  points within the body of `commands`. The human readable description of each
  file will be used as the label for the form field during upload.
* `help_text` (string): The help text made available to the user when submitting
  a job with this software. It should provide sufficient detail to enable users
  to prepare the input files for their jobs. This text is rendered as part of a
  web page and may contain html tags.
* `name` (string): The human readable name of the software. This is the text
  that will be displayed in the dropdown menu and which will be recorded when a
  job runs.

#### `external_links` (optional)

A dictionary of links to external resources. These are added as items to the
banner menu at the top of the Portal web interface. The intended use is to add
links to resources (e.g. a service status page) that may be relevant for
individual deployments. Both keys and values of the dictionary should be
strings. Keys will be used as the text displayed in the banner menu whilst
values provide the associated link. For example:

```
external_links:
  "System Status": https://my.status.page
```

### Production Deployment

Once a suitable configuration has been developed and tested.

1. Clone a copy of the repository source code to a directory within
   `/var/www/ood/apps/sys`
1. Within the new clone, create a new file `settings/site.py`. This file will
   contain all of the Django settings required for a site specific
   deployment. Among it's imports it must have `from .production import *` to
   pick up the configuration from both `settings.py` and `production.py` in the
   same directory. See the Django documentation for full details of valid
   settings. At a minimum you will need to set values for `ALLOWED_HOSTS` and
   `ADMINS` as well as valid configuration of an SMTP server (including
   credentials if required). You can also use this file to overwrite any
   settings from `settings.py` and `production.py`. Settings for the Portal that
   you may wish to override:
  * `DATABASES["default"]["name"]` - due to OOD's use of dedicated per user
    servers to run apps each user has their own sqlite3 database. The value of
    this setting determines where the database is saved. The default location is
    the file `portal_db_DO_NOT_DELETE.sqlite3` in the users home directory.
  * `JOBS_DIR` - this is the location where the Portal will store data for jobs
    that it runs. Job submission is carried out from sub-directories. The
    default value is the directory `portal_jobs` in the user's home directory.
1. Create a `.env` file in the root directory of the portal source code
   containing:

   ```
   SECRET_KEY="A new randomly generated secret key"
   DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE="portal.settings.site"
   PORTAL_CONFIG_PATH="/path/to/your/portal_config.yaml"
   ```

The Portal should now be launchable for all users via the OOD Dashboard as "HPC
Portal" under the Jobs category. If you've enabled the Zenodo repository please
see the below section on completing the setup steps required for this.

### Data Repositories

The Portal supports publishing individual jobs to linked data repository
services. The DOI from the publication is recorded in the portal against the job
record. Where repositories support the full DataCite Subject schema publication
of rich metadata is also possible. The files and metadata uploaded for a record
are specified on a job-by-job basis from the contents of the `FILES_TO_PUBLISH`
and `METADATA` files in a job directory. It is expect that these files will be
created during a job according to the software being used. See the documentation
for the`software` key within the [Configuration File
Reference](#configuration-file-reference) section.

The portal ships with a Zenodo integration that can be enabled. See [Using the
Zenodo Integration](#using-the-zenodo-integration) below.

Data repository integrations are written as plugins. Any Python module placed in
`main/repositories/plugins/` will be imported. See [Developing a Repository
Plugin](#developing-a-repository-plugin) for details on writing a plugin.

#### Using the Zenodo Integration

Once enabled this integration requires the details of an developer (OAuth2)
application in order to function. This can be setup via the Zenodo website using
any valid user account but it's suggested to something institutional so that
everything looks official for end users. At time of writing an app can be
created via Settings->Applications->Developer Applications. The correct redirect
URI to use will depend on your deployment of the Portal but should be the URI of
the index page suffixed with `token/zenodo`. The client type should be private.

Once created you'll need the Client ID and Client Secret in order to
proceed. With these in hand add the following entries to the `.env` file in the
root of your portal:

```
ZENODO_CLIENT_ID="your client id"
ZENODO_CLIENT_SECRET="your client secret"
```

It should now be possible for users to link to the repository (authorize the
OAuth application) and publish jobs.

#### Developing a Repository Plugin

Repository integrations are provided by concrete sub-classes of the abstract
`RepositoryBase` defined in `main/repositories/base_repository.py`. The
sub-class must also be decorated by the `register` function defined in
`main/repositories/__init__.py`.

The `RepositoryBase` abstract class was designed with OAuth2 applications in
mind and only this method is officially supported. That said the class is
flexible enough that it can be (and has been) used with other schemes. The
included Zenodo integration is a good starting point for interacting with other
OAuth2 applications.

[example configuration]: https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/hpc_portal_config
